I'm slowly dying.
How far can it go?
Oh. my God.
I got my chance.
The "Alone"
World Championship.
Doesn't get any better.
Got him.
Going up against
some of the world's
best bushcrafters.
"Fy-yah"!
This ain't a beauty pageant.
This is a survival challenge.
It takes
a little bit of insanity
to want to stay
out here alone.
Ah! Bear.
Hee-ooh!
But I think I might have
that little bit of insanity.
We are in
one of the most harsh
environments on the planet.
The Beaufort Delta
in the shadow
of the Richardson Mountains.
Yeah!
It's 125 miles
into the Arctic Circle.
I'm so far away from
the place I belong to.
Ooh!
There's gonna be
a bitch slap of reality.
Place is [bleep] brutal.
Being alone
out here. it changes you.
You do lose your mind.
but maybe you find
some of your soul as well.
Oh. my God. Oh. my God.
What a day to be alive.
This is the first
"Alone" World Championship.
Ten participants
from different
countries and cultures.
It's really something amazing.
Whoo-hoo!
Oh. man.
I'm literally launching
myself into an experience
to see what I'm made of
in a world
that I don't know much about.
We are walking
into an environment
that most people
will never witness.
Holy [bleep].
This is happening.
This is really happening.
There are not many people
on the planet
who would even attempt
this experience.
We are 125 miles
into the Arctic Circle.
The thick snow.
the cold weather.
and the extreme winds are
coming. and it's coming quick.
This is insane.
What the hell have I done?
The Arctic
is a beautiful place.
but the Arctic is
a freezing cold desert.
There are not a lot
of resources up here.
If that moose walks by you
or that 30-pound pike
hits your line.
you better get it.
'cause that might be
the only shot that you have.
♪ Giddy up. giddy up
Predators would
be a massive problem--
packs of wolves
moving through.
caribou and moose. wolverines.
But my biggest worry is
definitely grizzly bears.
40.000 to 50.000 grizzly bears
make this place their home.
I don't know
what will be my reaction
when I come face-to-face
with predators.
I am meat for them.
but they are meat for me too.
So I have to do
what I need to do to survive.
The biggest
struggle is gonna be.
what happens to people when
they are completely isolated
and all they have
is themselves?
The raw you is what
you're gonna face out there.
and you better be
prepared for it.
All alone.
It feels good.
$500.000
is life-changing money.
To be the last one standing
is gonna take
everything that I have.
Being in the World
Championship of "Alone"
is intense.
I'm honored to be here.
competing against
some really tough competition.
If you're gonna stick around.
you're gonna have to be
a tough.
gritty son of a bitch.
Time to get to work.
Well. things just got
real quiet really. really fast.
Oh. my God.
This is home.
All right.
I'm gonna collect myself.
First thing I do--first thing
I gotta do. temporary shelter.
Okay. here we go.
Well. we know not to put our
shelter anywhere in here.
It's pretty boggy.
Oh. hello.
Wherever I go.
no matter if it's
an inner city. a suburb.
or a new environment.
I'm always looking
at the plants.
Wow.
Oh. wow. This is really good.
I think there's a lot more
out there than we realize.
in terms of the plants.
You know. the terrain.
so far. it's a bit rough.
but...
there's a lot
of resources here.
There is food out there.
There's a lot of
minerals out there.
There's a lot of vitamins
out there.
There's a lot out there
that's gonna help us.
Finding it might not be easy.
but it doesn't mean
it's not abundant.
Oh. wow. Okay.
So we've got some
clubmoss right here.
I think for tonight. we are
going to sleep in the moss.
It kind of feels like
home in a weird way.
And I'm recording. Ah.
Why do I keep doing that?
Oh. hello out there.
I've been living in a van
for three years.
This is my home.
I'll give you a tour
on the inside.
I travel all throughout
the continental United States.
so I currently
don't have roots.
I was a video editor for a
lot of television commercials.
branded content.
I love
the storytelling aspect.
but my job was sort of
forcing me to be a person
that I didn't
wanna be anymore.
It was just
this constant chase
of thoughts and anxieties.
and I would find myself
going outdoors
because it just brought me
so much more joy.
Okay. so first of all.
you have a ton of goldenrod.
Then. when I understood
what ethnobotany was--
ethnobotany is the relationship
between plants and people.
It's medicine. Is it edible?
Does it aid in fire?
That's when
I started to dedicate
my life to the outdoors.
Okay.
Right now. I'm the founder
of Wildcard Wilderness.
and I teach wilderness skills
all across the country.
I'm not even doing anything.
The wind is just
doing the work for me.
There are people
in this competition who.
hands down. you know that
their number one is hunting.
and that's not me.
I'm a tool maker.
I am your backyard engineer
that is going to find a way
to solve a problem
with some sticks and some
cordage and some pitch glue.
Oh. you did it! Good job!
- Yeah!
The end goal
is to be courageous.
And I think that it will also
really benefit my school.
I think my school
is at this point
where the only way for it to
grow is if I had my own land.
$1/2 million
would change my life.
Well. welcome to...
My kingdom for the evening.
It's essentially just
a tarp on a pile of moss.
And I'm okay with that.
Survival isn't always
meant to be pretty.
I just still can't believe
that I'm here.
You know. five years ago
today...
I lost so much.
Five years ago today
was the day I lost my mom.
You know. I lost everything.
It was one of
the darkest times of my life.
But my mom gave me
a reset button.
So instead of building my life
to the life that I had.
I decided to rebuild it
to the life that I wanted
and one that catered
towards the outdoors.
My mom gave me
the best gift ever.
But I know she's out there.
And I know she's cheering me
on. and I know she's with me.
You know.
I need the camera gear
to film me getting
the camera gear.
There we go.
That's something.
Now we need. like. a caption
at the bottom of this. being.
"Alone" participants receive
up to X amount of pounds
of camera gear
to film their experience.
Here we go.
I got my tripod.
I do like the ease
of this chest mount.
It's true.
We really are alone.
filming all this stuff.
Part survivalist. part...
documentarian. filmmaker...
Part bat-[bleep] crazy.
Video. Rolling. rolling.
My name is Nero.
I live in New South Wales
in Australia.
My wife and I have our own
outdoor education company.
Got my little pack mule here.
My whole entire idea is
trying to get people outside.
reconnecting with nature.
Such a beautiful spot.
I spent time in the military.
but it wasn't till
I came to the outdoors
in bushcraft.
I started to realize
this is my place.
This is what I've been
looking for all this time.
Very confident in
my fishing ability.
understanding where
fish wanna feed.
where they like to travel.
There's dinner.
I can shoot my bow.
and I can shoot it well.
but I'm not a big-game hunter.
In Australia. I've only
hunted goat and small game.
Look at our beautiful goat.
I've spent the last
two winters in Canada.
doing snowshoe expeditions
with Kie from
Lure of the North.
Kie was on "Alone" season 7.
made it 80 days.
She's inspired me
in so many ways.
I've experienced minus 30.
I've spent a long time
pushing through
uncomfortable situations.
Trick is.
focus on your breathing
and try not to squeal.
Whoo!
I know all the strategies
and the tactics
that will keep me safe
and keep me warm.
All cozied up in the quinzhee.
I've got an
incredibly supportive
wife and son behind me.
I'll miss them a lot.
but I've spent
enough time away to know that
I will be stronger for that.
Nice.
I find it to be
a great honor to be
ambassador for the
Australian outdoor community.
Whoo!
I've got the skills.
I've got the experience.
Whatever happens out there.
I'm gonna be better for it.
and I'm gonna
come away a winner.
I'm just gonna have
a little bit of a look around.
just this initial spot
to see whether there's
something suitable
for a temporary shelter.
Just trying to get
a flattish area
that doesn't really
require much to clear.
When I'm thinking
about shelter.
I'm thinking about
the five Ws.
It's. like. wood. water. wind.
wildlife. and widow-makers.
Now. I don't wanna commit
to a permanent shelter
until I've scoped out
all of my land.
Some people argue there's
two more. whiskey and women.
but I haven't really
gotta worry about that.
There's a bit
of a clear spot here.
I like it.
Okay.
My biggest concern is just
trying to do too much too fast
and either making mistakes or
just burning through calories.
So I'm really mindful
of just slowing down.
trying to get established
and go from there.
So for my temporary shelter.
I'm just gonna
stick to a basic A-frame.
I'm gonna set up the ridgeline
with my paracord
between two trees
and then hang my tarp over it.
I want it raised as well
so I can kind of look out
and see around
my surroundings.
People are gonna see
an Australian on "Alone"
in the Arctic. and they're
just gonna be like.
you're not gonna last because
of how cold this place gets.
I'm thriving on that.
I'm looking forward
to surprising people.
Looking pretty good.
Here we are.
It's my shelter.
so I'm standing up.
A good bit of clearance.
Then I can sit down.
and I'm protected
from the rain.
and I can see all around me.
It feels pretty good here.
Just getting established.
Go from there.
Little baby steps.
Man. this site was made for me.
So much spruce pitch.
I love spruce gum.
Echoes of an old addiction.
I guess. chewing tobacco.
I mean. it's no Copenhagen.
but spruce pitch
is pretty damn good.
I'm gonna be chewing
the [bleep] out of that stuff.
Just gotta figure out
where I'm gonna
set up my tarp for tonight.
The first day.
there's priorities
that need to be met
right away:
a shelter. fire. water.
So that tree and that tree
are gonna host my ridgepole
for this lean-to I'm building.
The weather here is
a force to be reckoned with.
Perfect.
Just wanna clear off
some of this bark.
At this time of year.
hypothermia
is a big concern of mine.
I need to get my tarp up
as soon as possible.
So I've gotta cut notches
on the trees
'cause I don't have paracord.
so I'm not relying on the
tensile strength of snare wire.
And so I'm thinking
of running snare wire
around a couple trees and then
lashing a ridgepole to it
and then just
doing an A-frame.
Just cutting off
a few sections of this
to hold up my ridgepole.
Elsie May. that's what
you did to Daddy's wire.
I love you so much. but this is
a pain in the butt now.
Dada.
What are we doing. Elsie?
I did that.
To come up here.
I left behind my wife. Katie.
and my daughters.
Elsie May and Alice Mary.
- Hello.
- Hum.
A one-and-a-half-year-old
and a three-month-old.
- Oh!
You're scaring away
all the game.
It was a hard decision.
but it's a once-in-a-lifetime
opportunity.
Yeah.
Let's go get it.
I've been
a traditional bowhunter
and bowyer
for about ten years.
Looks pretty good.
So I'm very confident
in my ability to hunt.
It's a moose missile.
I've been focusing
more time on fishing
and trapping
for the past few months
to really prepare myself.
And I think
I'm willing to sacrifice
a lot more than most people.
You need to stay disciplined
and have train of thought
and be conscious
of what you're doing.
And being ready for when
the opportunity comes
is paramount.
A nice. clean rabbit.
Eating that guy for dinner.
500 grand would help us
pay off our house.
Not having a mortgage would
be a huge burden lifted.
just in our ability
to take more time off...
I love you guys.
And to be the man that
my family needs me to be
and to be there and to show
love and affection...
And strength and courage
and determination to my kids.
I love you.
Got fire.
got shelter. got water.
It's pretty damn good.
All right. let's go
for a walk and set some snares.
I think I'd be foolish
to think that missing home
would not be on my mind
every single day.
So you gotta
fight through that
and remind myself that this is
a temporary experience.
and as soon as you
give up would be
the second that you regret it.
Oh. [bleep].
There's a grouse.
[bleep].
Damn it. damn it. damn it.
I missed twice.
[bleep].
I had a very easy shot
and a very--
two very bad misses.
so that's on me.
Could be tired.
Could be. yeah.
just overwhelmed
with the experience
of what's going on right now.
Probably both.
but I'm not gonna
beat myself up about it
anymore.
I'll look for my arrow
in the morning.
My beautiful
and loving wife told me
that the first night I'm out
here. don't sleep on the ground
and don't get wet.
Make sure you make a temporary
shelter with rain cover.
So here I am.
middle of nowhere.
listening to my wife.
I sure love her.
In Iñupiaq. we like
to thank our animals
for giving themselves to us.
So for this snowshoe hare.
I will say...
My name is
Will Punikerik Longley.
Hey! What are you doing?
Punikerik is my Iñupiaq name.
It was given to me by an elder
when I was three years old.
Beautiful out here.
We got hit good
with fresh apun.
"Apun" is Iñupiaq for "snow."
The Iñupiaq people.
we've been around
for thousands
and thousands of years.
surviving in Arctic climates
of ice and snow and wind.
So our elders say
when we harvest a bear
to cut the bottom of
the tongue out and stick it
in between a piece of willows.
and that releases
the bear's spirit.
Personally. what I wanna take
away from this experience is
I want to relive what
my ancestors lived through.
I wanna experience
what they experienced.
I want to know how it was like
to live off the land.
I know that this experience
is probably
one of the only ways
to do that.
There it is.
And I think with all of
the knowledge and skill set
that my ancestors have
passed down to me.
I definitely feel like
a strong contender.
Look at that guy.
What a giant.
Hi!
Hi.
Hi. girl.
The most difficult
part is going to be
being away from my family.
You guys wanna hold the fish?
- Yeah!
When I think of family.
I think of life.
Family is just something
that I don't think
I could live without. and I
don't see how anybody can.
Bye.
Bye. Daddy.
When everything's
said and done.
I wanna feel like
I represented my people well
and made them proud.
And I think by winning.
I can show that our culture
has won
for thousands of years.
Feel like I'm gonna sleep good.
All right.
I better find my headlamp.
And we're gonna
call that a night.
Well. uvlaalluataq.
First night down.
On to day two. and I'd like
to explore my location.
Looks like good
rabbit country here.
I thought I heard something.
but it was just bugs.
I wanna get familiar
with the area.
kind of get a feel
for my terrain.
Obviously. I'm gonna think
about my kids all the time.
so I'm gonna do
one of the only things
I've known how to do.
and that's work hard
and stay busy.
Keeping busy is keeping sane.
Let's see what we got here.
Very fresh wolf tracks.
like I'm right behind the guy.
Here's a duck.
Yeah. he's bleeding good.
He's gonna go over that bank
and die. I'm sure.
I'm gonna give him time
and see if I
can't retrieve these arrows.
Well. let's go find that duck.
Okay. made it
to the other side.
Where's that duck at?
I don't see it just yet.
Right there.
Nice.
Now we just need
a long stick to get him.
Oh. yeah.
Nice.
Sweet.
Got him.
It cost me one arrow.
but I'll be eating tonight.
It's starting to
feel like home.
I can't believe
I slept in so late.
It's okay.
It's hard to kind of
sleep here.
You have a million things
running through your brain
of. like. what to do.
what to build.
how much time do you have.
It's not raining today.
It's overcast.
but it's not raining.
So I'm gonna
take this opportunity
to dry some of my clothes.
But I think I wanna make
some tea.
I'm also gonna go
for a walk for tinder.
I gotta do something
for these bug bites.
Eat some berries.
I think that's the plan.
I wish I had coffee.
I spoke too soon.
It's gonna be
a really hard time
with how damp everything is.
This is super frustrating.
I was hoping that the weather
from day one would continue.
but that didn't happen.
So I'm gonna take right now
to do some self-care.
If being in a swamp wasn't
already a bit unforgiving.
now it's the wet season.
Oh. my God.
everything is just wet.
Everything is just getting wet.
Wet. wet. wet. wet. wet.
So getting ready for fire
and fire maintenance
and staying dry is
a whole other added element
to this experience.
So after this tea is done--
[bleep]. Oh. my God.
A pool of water coming in.
and now my sleeping bag
is soaking wet.
Oh. my God!
There's no way I'm gonna be
able to dry this in this rain.
Oh. my God.
Oh. my God!
[bleep].
What am I gonna--[bleep].
I'm gonna freeze my
[bleep] off [bleep] tonight.
That's what I'm gonna
[bleep] do.
Now I have a wet
[bleep] sleeping bag.
Oh. my God.
I really don't wanna [bleep]
leave for this.
This is so stupid!
Oh!
I knew this wasn't
gonna be easy.
You can't always
expect every day
to be sunshine and rainbows.
but conditions are
what you make of them.
Jacks. chill. Relax.
Just chill.
You're smart.
You're very smart.
You can fix this problem.
So you can choose
to be miserable...
You know how to fix things.
You are a problem-solver.
Or you can choose
to push through it.
It's not too bad.
The sleeping bag is
not. like. pierced.
It's just damp.
So this will end.
I will live.
I will be dry again.
And every storm eventually
runs out of rain.
so you just gotta wait it out.
We're gonna do
a short little walkabout.
and I'm going to confirm
my permanent shelter location.
My temporary shelter looks
like a giant burrito...
And I am the filling.
It's just a problem.
You lose your body heat
25 times faster if you're wet.
so I need to figure out
where my long-term shelter
is going to be.
Because if you can't get fire.
at least shelter
can protect you.
So I stumbled
upon this new pond
with all of this
amazing seed down.
It's some sort of.
I believe. buttercup.
but look at this view.
This is unreal.
I think we know our answer.
and the answer is that
I need to figure out a way
to be closer to this pond
to check out the rest
of this landscape.
So this is a giant pile of crap
that is
pretty big bear activity.
past day or two.
So that's not a good sign.
There's a lot of it--
here. here. here. here. here.
I think I know now I don't
wanna camp near here.
Getting a shelter up
as fast as possible
is my number one priority.
It's okay.
We'll go this way.
But covering
as much ground as I can
in the shortest amount of time
is not going to be easy
in a terrain
as unforgiving as this.
This terrain.
We're not talking temperature.
We're not talking animals.
We're talking
just the ground alone.
This is so much work.
Way more difficult beyond
what I could have imagined.
Wait a second.
I know I was still
wearing the--oh. wow.
I lost a freaking shirt.
a sweater
wrapped around my waist.
This place is [bleep] brutal.
Every single step...
Is so grueling.
Ooh.
Ah.
This [bleep] terrain.
Oh. it hurt my shoulder.
I feel like
I'm just wasting time.
Ah.
And I'm losing [bleep].
Things aren't working.
Like. it's really easy.
I think.
for people to also.
like. watch this show
and be like. oh. well.
why didn't she or he do that?
Blah. blah. blah. blah.
It's different when
you're out here. man.
Your head and everything you do
has to be so dialed in.
And I lost a crucial item.
a piece of clothing
that will keep me warm.
One. two. three.
That's my little snare.
I gotta check my snares.
Yes!
Yo. beauty!
♪ I just found
what I was hoping to find ♪
Ah!
A drink bottle.
I did not think
that there was gonna be
much rubbish around here.
given the remoteness of this.
Ah!
This opens up
a lot more exploring.
I can take this with me
and drink whilst I'm out there
for. like. almost a whole day.
This isn't just a small--
this is--
oh!
Land provides.
The land provides.
Ah.
Whoo!
My main strategy
for being out here
is trying to have
as many passive means
of getting food as possible.
so I wanna have a snare line
going for snowshoe hare.
I wanna have snares out
for squirrel.
All right. snare line.
Let's go.
I've never trapped
snowshoe hare in the fall.
because I've never been
in Canada in the fall.
One. two. three.
No change.
Empty. empty.
I'm used to coming up
when it's full winter.
There's snow and ice
everywhere.
It's gonna take me a while
to kind of figure it out.
No. it's fine.
No change.
As I learn the land.
I can kind of adjust
and go from there.
At the moment.
it's just about spray and pray
and try and put out
as many as I can.
Yes. This one has a hare in it.
I think it might
still be alive.
It is.
Got him on the foot.
Sorry. dude.
You're fighting for your life.
I get it. I get it. I get it.
Shh.
Thanks. little guy.
Trap line produces.
First snowshoe hare.
Got it by its foot.
which is not ideal.
But I'm super grateful for
my first protein of the land.
It gives me confidence that.
you know.
this spot can provide for me.
I just gotta keep
figuring it out.
Take this guy back.
get him processed.
and enjoy my first solid meal.
Trap line's starting
to produce.
Getting somewhere.
It's pretty special just to
get your first actual game
off the land.
Liver.
So much nutrients
in that liver.
Whoo.
You go in there to check.
and there's no sign.
You're not even sure whether
you're in the right area.
And then to have one
come in into your snare.
you're just like. okay.
we're on the right path.
A lot of meat in there.
It just opens up
the possibility
of more coming my way.
And if I can
make it happen once.
I can make it happen again.
Pot full of snowshoe hare.
I'll eat some now.
and I'll have more tomorrow
for breakfast as well.
Perfect.
These organs right here
are just gonna be a huge boost
of vitamins and minerals.
Hmm.
Oh. yeah.
Efforts are paying off.
Thank you.
Ah. thank you.
Hunting is very opportunistic
in a place like this.
So as I'm walking around.
my bow is always in my hand.
Arrows are in the quiver.
ready to go.
should the need arise
where I need to send one.
It's thick. but might
find rabbits in there.
Gotta play to win.
My site is bountiful.
It's full of berries.
I see lots of
small-game trails.
I see moose sign
and bear sign on the beach.
Anything moving is gonna
get an arrow in it.
Thought I smelled moose.
I thought I could smell moose.
Pretty sure I did.
I've wanted to hunt moose my
entire life as an outdoorsman.
They're such
an impressive animal.
Just the thought of having
the opportunity to hunt one.
I'm getting goose bumps.
Grouse.
Damn it.
I'm not sure what's
going on with me.
Missing--missing like crazy.
missing shots
that I never miss.
Marking a trail back
to that arrow I lost.
I need to get back to camp.
think about
what I wanna do next.
It's so unlike me
to miss shots like that.
In everything I've ever done.
I've always found
an extra gear
and been successful.
So not finding that extra gear
is a big concern of mine.
Where I'm standing right now.
it. like. shows
absolutely zero sign
of a human ever being here...
On a piece of land maybe
nobody's ever stepped foot on.
It's kind of
a wild realization.
And for the first meal
of the day...
I have here
the rosehips.
My plan for food.
eat everything that I can--
berries. worms.
grubs. insects. fish. meat.
birds. everything I can catch.
Hello?
I shot a squirrel.
Yeah.
Thank you. man.
I shot my first meal.
The castle of my city.
Palmela.
My name is Clementino Pedrosa.
I have been in the
Portuguese Army for 21 years.
I started with six years
in the paratroopers.
Every day. we went training.
calisthenics.
I catch a boa in the snare.
Then I spend two years
in the sergeant school.
where I learned a lot
about tactics.
The heart of the boar.
Very nice to eat.
And when I finished. I went in
the special troops. Commandos.
where I became a survival
instructor for the military.
And I wrote
three survival books.
Nature is always good to us.
With all the things
that can happen to me--
starving. injuries.
predators--
I have the skills
to deal with it.
It's starting to snow stronger.
and I can't be here.
But I want to test
my limits...
Here is my shelter.
Prove to myself that I have
the will to survive anything.
Today will be
the wedding of my sister.
I have a good family.
We love
to spend time together.
But tapping out
for being alone
is not a possibility for me.
My parents created me
not to be at their side
when things become wrong
but to protect everybody.
My last cut.
That's why I joined the army.
I know that I have the skills.
I can push further.
Goodbye. goodbye.
goodbye. goodbye.
Ciao.
So I'm ready to go
through the sacrifice
and become someone
that they are proud about.
Let's go.
Look at this.
Let's cook this.
In all the seasons.
non-active military
won the show.
So for me being here alone
is like "Rambo." the movie.
I hope I can inspire
all the military guys.
I decided to bring
the flag of my country
instead of a picture
of my family.
because I have my family
in my mind all the time.
and I know they
understand that.
And I decided to bring
that flag. a symbol of hope
to the Portuguese people.
And for me.
it's important because
I want to prove to myself
and the people
that it's possible to survive.
Let's eat the brain.
Yeah. the little brain.
Another squirrel.
Oh. no. no. no.
The guts.
Awesome.
I shot another one.
I shot another squirrel
with my bow.
Awesome.
My start is easy.
Thank you very much.
I can stay.
I can feed myself.
I hope. in the future.
this will not be a problem.
Thank you. God.
Thank you.
A challenge like this really
is dependent
on your life circumstance.
Like. I set up everything
to where it would operate
when I'm gone. but...
the guilt associated
with putting burdens
on everyone else
is significant.
I miss tucking my daughter
into bed. singing to her.
They grow so fast
when they're that young.
Like. I just don't wanna miss
any of it if I don't have to.
Okay. stay focused.
Priority for today. fishing.
Fatherhood means
a lot of things to me.
It means providing
a safe. stable. honorable.
respectable place
for my daughters to become
who they were made to be.
Pretty skinny
for bait right now.
but we're gonna try
some cranberries
that look like fish eggs
and a little frog that I found.
Let's go fishing.
I do worry about if I'm good
enough as a father. every day.
I come from a line of fathers
that were kind of absent.
It's very damaging
to grow up without a father.
Wow.
Just lost the hook already.
Man. I can just not
snap into [bleep].
Get in the game. David.
Get in the game. man.
It's at the forefront of
my mind to break that cycle
and to be the man that
my family needs me to be.
Good Lord.
Oh. my gosh.
Being a provider
for my family is something
that I take very seriously.
Being out here is a very
roundabout way to do that.
The question is. are you
putting your family first
or are you putting
yourself first?
And I don't know what...
I don't know
what's going on with me.
I need to snap
out of it. though.
I'm just exhausted.
My stomach is still
just churning.
I'm gonna go put up
some more snares now.
I feel like in any other point
in my life up to this moment.
I would have been
just ecstatic doing this.
And for some reason. I can't
seem to gather any enthusiasm.
Man. I [bleep] miss
my wife and kids.
I am not in the game
right now. so...
the thought of my stubborn ass
going as long as I can...
I don't want it.
Hey. this is David.
I am officially tapping out.
I'm...
I'm feeling ready to go home.
It's obviously not
how I wanted it to go.
but the cumulative time
away from my family.
I'd never been away
from them that long.
And it's like a magnet. man.
It's like.
it's inseparable. like.
wanting to come back together
and be there for them
and them be there for me.
And all I can think about
is my wife and kids.
This just not how
I saw myself leaving.
I'm not one to quit. ever.
I came out here to win.
but I'm choosing this
over being at home
with my wife and kids.
And that was a decision
that I was
no longer comfortable making.
What I told myself
to come out here
was that I'm doing it
for them and that
they will reap the benefits
of the cash prize.
And then it just occurred
to me every step of the way.
like. man. there's not a thing
in the world worth trading
time with your family for.
You talk to anybody
on their deathbed.
that's all they want. is time.
They want more time
with their family.
I know the kind of father
I am committed to being.
A good father doesn't
take days off from that.
My lips are very dry.
so I need to take care of them.
I will use the fat
of the skin...
For my skin.
When the rain stops.
I will check my snares.
Yeah. that's it.
For my hunting strategy.
I already set up snares.
I go hunting every day.
in the morning.
Let's see.
Nothing.
Let's check the other snares.
I think I will fail a lot.
That will be
my number one skill.
dealing with the failure.
because it's normal for me
to fail.
All the courses
that I passed in the army.
I was pushing
to the limit to fail.
And dealing with the fail
is the most important thing.
That's where the grit is.
I catch a rabbit in the snare.
Thank you. rabbit.
Let's cook this.
Want to cut here.
Yeah.
Cleaning the rabbit.
I learned with my mom.
My parents teached us
how to cook.
and making your own things
to eat and drink is the best.
The ground squirrel
have more fat
than the rabbit.
The flavor of everything
is completely different
than the commercial things.
Oh. it will be good
to make a pair of gloves.
It will be awesome.
I am grateful for my childhood
and my family.
Yeah. let's take off.
If I win. I will share all
the prize money with them.
And we have a beautiful rabbit.
Equal to equal.
Let's go.
Because we are like one.
We are one family.
Wait.
I see another rabbit.
He is so close for my snare.
I can't get closer.
Oh.
He got trapped.
Ah.
Sorry. man.
It's amazing.
Two rabbits.
Let's make some fire.
That rabbit. he was
so close to the snare.
and I shot the arrow.
then missed the shot.
But the rabbit ran
and get caught in the snare.
and it was funny to see.
But once again.
it felt so easy.
I need to be cautious.
because surviving
is not for ego.
The leg of the rabbit.
The ego can destroy you.
Thank you.
And sometimes it's difficult.
Let's eat.
because I deserve to eat.
I say to myself.
fight your ego.
Don't let your ego
be superior...
This tastes awesome.
Because if I let the ego
of hunting being so easy.
I can see myself
in a hard situation.
Okay. I'm gonna
continue on with
my traditional berry picker.
And you can see.
we just need
to install the nails
at the base of the picker.
And that's gonna be
difficult. I think.
I found some old pieces of
wood next to the riverbank.
Some of them have nails that
I know I could use for tools.
And the immediate thing
that comes to mind
is making a traditional
berry picker.
Starting to get cracks here.
And I can drill out
the remaining nine holes.
Then we won't have
this splitting.
I'm gonna get the components
of my Eskimo bow drill made.
my pattaqtuun.
I've built many berry pickers.
The split that the nails
are causing is common.
so I need to pre-drill
the holes for the nails
to be inserted.
But the only way
to pre-drill these holes
is to use a traditional
Iñupiaq mouth drill.
Okay. looking good.
So put the mouthpiece in.
Find the hole.
There it is.
And I want to drill there.
So as you can see.
I got a hand freed up.
And I'm gonna do it
just like that.
And that's gonna make a hole.
I'm looking to show
traditional methods
and traditional ways
of hunting. gathering.
tool making.
and shelter building.
Beautiful.
That worked amazing.
Representing the Iñupiaq people
is very important to me.
I'm hoping to show the world
how strong that we are
and how strong
that we've always been
for thousands of years.
And if it wasn't
for all of the knowledge
that was passed down
for generations.
we might not be here today.
All right. there it is.
Beautiful. beautiful
Iñupiaq berry comb.
Man. that is gonna pick me
a lot of berries.
Next on the agenda
this morning is working
on my permanent shelter.
So what I'm gonna do is.
I'm gonna
make a traditional ivrulik.
And "ivrulik" means
"sod house" in Iñupiaq.
We'll get started on that.
I'm gonna limb these three
trees. and we'll go from there.
A traditional ivrulik
sod house helped my people
survive through long winters.
and I'm hoping
that's gonna help me survive
the cold. frigid temperatures.
Okay. there's three posts.
all solid.
Need to install the fourth.
We're in one of the most
desolate climates on Earth.
We're gonna have
a lot of wind.
a lot of snow.
We're gonna have a lot
of freezing temperatures.
You're not gonna
survive the winter
without a strong shelter.
All right.
post number four. done.
Let's get the beams up.
So my strategy is to get
this shelter built fast.
There we go.
Okay.
We're solid.
In my head.
I know that if I do this
within the first few days. I'm
not gonna burn much energy.
I'm not gonna lose
a bunch of weight.
Timber.
I know if I can get this
finished quickly.
I'm gonna have a roof
over my head.
and I'm gonna be able
to devote
most of my time and be able
to have all the energy
to burn on hunting big game.
Yeah. I'm happy with that.
I'll head back to the shelter.
Wow. spruce grouse.
There's another one too.
You get a shot.
Thank you. buddy.
Two spruce grouse.
Woot-woot!
Nice.
Beautiful.
Taikuu. quyanaq.
spruce grouse.
for giving your lives to me.
I'm gonna be eating good
for a few days.
We got our beautiful grouse.
And that's just
gonna slide in.
just like that.
just like butter.
Look at that.
I'm gonna start
cooking it just like that.
Beautiful.
Being out here definitely
feels like home to me.
because this is
the life that I live.
We live off the land.
We live in darkness.
We live in cold.
We live with all
of the similar dangers
that this land has.
Oh. yeah.
We are done.
Let's bite into this guy.
Mmm.
So good.
Save the bone for fishhooks.
and we'll see
if they're strong enough.
And the heart.
Doesn't look
cooked all the way.
I will cook it a little longer.
And you know what.
as hungry as I am.
let's just do the heart
pretty much raw.
I mean. I think it's. like.
a quarter of the way cooked.
Yeah. it's not cooked.
but I don't care.
Every piece of flesh
and meat. it all adds up.
We'll tie these up in case
I decide that
they're strong enough
for fish barbs.
They look long enough.
Grouse feet. nunchucks.
Okay. very good.
Yeah.
I just have my Christmas tree.
I hope I can stay
and be the last one.
Today I will
modify my shelter.
Time to get to work.
Now that I catch enough food.
I feel like a bullfighter
with so much strength.
This remembers me
the calisthenics
in the paratroopers.
Make squats.
Yeah.
Two. three.
Eight. nine.
Ten. eleven.
Yeah.
The most important piece.
making a good shelter.
I will take off the tarp
and put some logs
in the back side.
The first days were important
to do the first walls.
but will be a problem
when the winter comes.
I can have a storm. and I need
to make a resistant shelter.
Careful.
Do not get the tarp.
Yeah.
Patience is
the most important
for my log cabin.
There are so many
straight logs around me.
building a log cabin
will not be a problem.
I will put four sticks each
side and put log above log.
in the horizontal.
I want to have
the best shelter.
Let's pick up
more moss to insulate.
Moss.
All this moss.
The plan that I have
is to make the shelter
and spend
all the days there...
Let's see.
Collecting wood. making traps.
fishing.
and enjoying every day
like it's the last day
of my life.
And I hope my brother
can be here with me.
sharing my beautiful shelter.
I'm expecting
that can happen for me.
But being alone
in this extreme environment
can change a lot.
And that's it for today.
That's it.
All right.
Iñupiaq berry comb.
Let's test it out.
Ooh.
That's how it works.
And once you get
more skilled at it.
you can just pick
a ton of berries quick.
You can see it just combs the
berries right off the leaves.
Just look at that. Beautiful.
Dump 'em in.
Keep on cruising.
Okay. we're gonna get
started on building
the permanent shelter again.
Big decision.
I'm gonna make my ivrulik
just half the width.
With all the trees
that I have to fell.
limb. stack.
and then moss after.
I don't wanna spend
that much time on a shelter.
So I'm just thinking
it's too big.
I'm gonna start pulling these
poles down. off the roof.
and reuse the poles
on the outside.
I don't wanna gas myself out
making a big shelter.
It's gonna take too long.
One. two. three. hyah!
More importantly. the energy
it's gonna save me...
Timber.
I'll be able to use
a lot more of it
to go hunt and fish
when the time comes.
A little bit
into the ground there.
Perfect.
I don't really like calling it
a shelter
just because shelter. to me.
just seems like a place
where you're living
to try to survive.
I don't wanna feel
like that out here.
like I'm in a place
where I'm just trying
to survive.
I wanna feel like I'm
in a place where I'm living.
a place where I'm thriving.
All right. ivrulik frame
is almost done.
Shall we go on a tour?
You can see the outside walls
are made from spruce.
Rooftop here.
Our qanitchaq entryway.
Beautiful.
Let's take you in.
Ooh. this is nice.
Beautiful ivrulik.
So this whole thing
will be covered in sod.
which is a top layer
of soil here.
And we'll move our
sleeping platform in here.
And then eventually.
I'll figure out a way
to get a fire pit in here.
a fire stove.
wood stove. something.
I'm gonna need
something for heat.
But yeah. I'm really
happy with the frame.
the outcome of the frame.
Day one. I was like.
what the heck am I doing here?
I got kids at home.
I just felt like. wow.
you know. this was a mistake.
I just felt like
I could tap today.
And then once I started to
get busy. I was on a mission.
And I know if I stay busy.
my mind isn't gonna have time
to think.
I feel like...
my kids. my wife.
and my culture.
that's all I have.
That's all I want.
I have those two things.
and I'm happy.
I always tell them.
you know.
if we were homeless or...
living at a camp or--
as long as if we
had each other.
that's all that would matter.
As long as if we had each other
and we're all healthy.
we'd be happy.
So I know that's the truth.
Mwah.
And we'll just keep that...
Up there.
Other than that. we'll
continue on with the ivrulik.
We'll be doing the moss.
the sod.
the ivru portion
of the ivrulik.
And I think that
might go smooth.
We'll call that a day.
Missed that.
What the [bleep] am I doing?
It's cold out there.
The shelter is not done yet.
but it's starting
to be a little better.
Working on the shelter
is hard. really. really hard.
You get tired fast.
So for today.
trying to catch something.
I start to teach
survival skills
to the army students
in the same time that
"Alone" started on TV.
So I tried to put something
of that in my classes.
because what I saw
in the other seasons is that
they quit
because of their mind.
So challenging my students
to push theirselves
to learn about their mind...
Nothing there.
Because the most important
is the grit that you have
to deal with hard days.
Squirrel.
I lost another arrow.
[bleep].
I already lost two arrows
because of a squirrel.
I don't want to lose any more.
And I lost all the arrows.
I brought only nine arrows.
Now I only have four arrows.
Let's try to find.
I miss all the shots.
I lost the arrows. and I start
to lose the confidence.
Why am I so stupid?
What is happening with me?
And I realize
I had some victories.
and I let my ego come out.
I can't see my arrow.
Damn.
This is not good.
I mumble enough
to understand that failure
is part of the process.
I need to collect...
This for making arrows.
new arrows.
And sometimes it's difficult.
but I don't focus
in the failure.
I focus in the next step.
What the hell is that?
There is something big here.
Yeah.
It's a moose.
Down there.
Holy [bleep].
I think it's two of them.
Two of them in the sand.
Oh. man.
Oh.
Amazing. but I can't kill them.
Looking at these moose.
it's wonderful.
I know I cannot hunt a female
with the son.
because it's not allowed
by the hunting rules.
But it's hope
that there is more.
Now...
she goes away.
This lake is my chance
to have big game.
I need to come here more times
and hope that one day.
I have my opportunity.
And in that moment.
I will not miss the shot.